.\" -*- mode: nroff -*-
.ds V 1.1
.ds E " \-\- 
.if t .ds E \(em
.de OP
.BR "\\$1" "\\$2" "\\$3" "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6"
..
.de OA
.IR "\fB\\$1\& \|\fI\\$2" "\\$3" "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6"
..
.de QO
.RB ` "\\$1" "'\\$2"
..
.de Sp
.if n .sp
.if t .sp 0.4
..
.de Es
.Sp
.RS 5
.nf
..
.de Ee
.fi
.RE
.PP
..
.de M
.BR "\\$1" "(\\$2)\\$3"
..
.de Rs
.RS
.Sp
..
.de Re
.Sp
.RE
..
.TH CLICK 5 "16/Mar/2004" "Version \*V"
.SH NAME
click \- Click configuration language
'
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Click language describes Click router configurations.
.LP
Two basic statements can implement any router.
.IR Declaration
statements create elements, and
.IR connection
statements define packet flow among them.
Think of a Click router configuration as a directed graph of elements.
Then declarations list the graph's vertices and connections list its edges.
.LP
A declaration looks like this:
.Rs
.IR "name" " :: " "class" ( "config" );
.Re
This introduces an element called
.IR name
with element class
.IR class
and configuration arguments
.IR config .
.LP
A connection looks like this:
.Rs
.IR "name1" " [" "port1" "] -> [" "port2" "] " "name2" ;
.Re
This connects
.IR name1 "'s output port " port1
and
.IR name2 "'s input port " port2 .
The two
.IR name s
must refer to previously declared elements, and the two
.IR port s
must be nonnegative integers.
.LP
Each element must be declared exactly once before being used in
any connection.  It is an error to declare an element name more than
once in the same scope.  It is not an error to repeat a connection,
however.
.LP
Lexically, Click identifiers, such as element names and class names,
are sequences of letters, numbers, underscores, at-signs, and slashes
that do not begin or end with a slash.  Configuration strings are
sequences of characters delimited by parentheses, possibly including
balanced parentheses and quoted strings.  The semicolons that
terminate statements are generally optional (in some cases described
later they are required to avoid ambiguity).  Lexical issues are
described in more depth below.
.LP
Any configuration can be completely defined with these statements.
The rest of the Click language offers extensive shorthand and
abstraction features that simplify router programming.
'
.SH "SHORTHAND"
.SS "Declaration shorthand"
'
Empty configuration strings can be omitted.
.Rs
.IR "name" " :: " "class" ;
.Re
You can also
declare multiple elements using a comma-separated list of names.
.Rs
.IR "name1" ", " "name2" ", ..., " "nameN" " ::"
.IR "class" ( "config" );
.Re
You may also declare an element without specifying its name, in which case the
system will choose an element name for you.  Such elements are called
.IR anonymous .
For example:
.Rs
.IR class "(" config ");"
.Re
is equivalent to
.Rs
.IR generatedname " :: " class ( config );
.Re
The
.I generatedname
has the form
.RI ` class "@" number ';
Click chooses the
.IR number
so that the name is unique. These numbers are predictable: when the
system parses a Click file twice, that file's anonymous elements will get
the same generated names each time. Users may also declare elements with names
like
.RI ` class "@" number ',
though we suggest that users avoid the `@'
character in their element names.
'
.SS "Connection shorthand"
'
You can string together several connections into a single statement if the
output element of one is the same as the input element of the other:
.Rs
.IR "a" " [1] -> [2] " "x"
.RI "[3] -> [4] " "b" ;
.Re
means
.Rs
.IR "a" " [1] -> [2] " "x" ;
.br
.IR "x" " [3] -> [4] " "b" ;
.Re
A missing port number implies port [0]. These two lines mean the same thing:
.Rs
.IR "n1" " [0] -> [0] " "n2" ;
.br
.IR "n1" " -> " "n2" ;
.Re
.PP
Elements may also be declared inside connections, either with names or
anonymously.  For instance,
.Rs
.RI "... -> [" "p1" "] " "name" " ::"
.IR "class" ( "config" ") [" "p2" "] -> ...;"
.Re
means
.Rs
.IR "name" " :: " "class" ( "config" );
.br
.RI "... -> [" "p1" "] " "name" " [" "p2" "] -> ...;"
.Re
Similarly,
.Rs
.RI "... -> [" p1 "] " class ( config )
.RI "[" p2 "] -> ...;"
.Re
means
.Rs
.IR generatedname " :: " class ( config );
.br
.RI "... -> [" p1 "] " generatedname " [" p2 "] -> ...;"
.Re
.SS "Many-to-one connections"
'
A many-to-one connection connects many elements to the same port.
.Rs
.IR "n1" ", " "n2" ", " "n3" " -> " "x" ;
.Re
means
.Rs
.IR "n1" " -> " x ";"
.br
.IR "n2" " -> " x ";"
.br
.IR "n3" " -> " x ";"
.Re
Port numbers are supported:
.Rs
.IR "n1" " [\fIp1\fR], " "n2" " [\fIp2\fR] -> [\fIp3\fR] " "x" ;
.Re
means
.Rs
.IR "n1" " [\fIp1\fR] -> [\fIp3\fR] " "x" ;
.br
.IR "n2" " [\fIp2\fR] -> [\fIp3\fR] " "x" ;
.Re
One-to-many connections are also allowed; put the comma-separated
list is on the right.
.LP
You may declare elements within a many-to-one connection, but unlike with declaration shorthand,
each declaration applies to only one name. For example
.Rs
.IR "n1" ", " "n2" " :: " "class" " -> " "n3" ";"
.Re
means
.Rs
.IR "n2" " :: " "class" ";"
.br
.IR "n1" " -> " "n3" ";"
.br
.IR "n2" " -> " "n3" ";"
.Re
Note that
.IR n1
was not declared.
'
.SS "Many-to-many connections"
'
A many-to-many connection connects many outputs to many
inputs. For example, consider a simple Classifier. This code:
.Rs
.IR c " :: Classifier(00/01, 00/02, 00/03);"
.br
.IR next " :: " class ";"
.Sp
.br
.IR c " [0] -> Paint(0) -> " "next" ";"
.br
.IR c " [1] -> Paint(1) -> " "next" ";"
.br
.IR c " [2] -> Paint(2) -> " "next" ";"
.Re
can more concisely be written like this, using the `=>' many-to-many connector:
.Rs
.IR c " [0], " c " [1], " c " [2] => Paint(0), Paint(1), Paint(2) -> " next ";"
.Re
or, even more concisely, either of the following:
.Rs
.IR c " [0,1,2] => Paint(0), Paint(1), Paint(2) -> " next ";"
.br
.IR c " => Paint(0), Paint(1), Paint(2) -> " next ";"
.Re
Each many-to-many connection must list the same number of output ports (on the left) as input ports (on the right).
However, if one side of the connection has exactly one element and no port, Click implicitly assigns that
element's ports sequentially starting from 0.
'
.SS "Element groups"
'
Element groups cleanly express small detours from a connection path.
For example, consider:
.Rs
.IR c " :: Classifier(00/01);"
.br
.IR x " -> " c " -> " y ;
.br
.IR c " [1] -> Paint(1) -> " y ;
.Re
Expressing the detour with an element group preserves the
configuration's overall linear flow:
.Rs
.IR x " -> " c " :: Classifier(00/01) => (
.br
.RI "\~\~\~\~input [0] -> output;"
.br
.RI "\~\~\~\~input [1] -> Paint(1) -> output"
.br
.RI ") -> " y ";"
.Re
An element group is one or more Click statements enclosed in parentheses.
Within the parentheses, the special pseudoelements "input" and
"output" refer to connections from outside the group.  Click expands
the group at parse time, so connections through "input" and "output"
have no run-time overhead.  The following five lines are equivalent:
.Rs
.IR x " -> " y ";"
.br
.IR x " -> ( input -> output ) -> " y ";"
.br
.IR x " -> ( [0] -> [0] ) -> " y ";"
.br
.IR x " -> (->) -> " y ";"
.br
.IR x " -> ( [0]->[0]; [1]->[1] ) => ( [0]->[0]; [1]->[1] ) -> " y ";"
.Re
Lines three through five use the fact that Click infers "input" at the
beginning of a connection, and "output" at the end of a connection,
when element names are missing.  (This language feature
can require explicit semicolons to avoid ambiguity.)  Line five also
uses the fact that connections may be repeated without error (the line
expands to "\fIx\fR -> \fIy\fR; \fIx\fR -> \fIy\fR").  It is an error
to use an "input" pseudoelement's input ports or an "output"
pseudoelement's output ports.
.LP
Element groups have implicit, overridable port specifications that
list all their ports in sequential order.  For example, these three
lines are equivalent:
.Rs
.IR x " => ( [0]->[0]; [1]->[1] ) -> " "y" ";"
.br
.IR x " => [0,1] ( [0]->[0]; [1]->[1] ) [0,1] -> " "y" ";"
.br
.IR x " -> " y "; " x " [1] -> " y ";"
.Re
It is an error to define an element group with nonsequential ports, or
to leave one or more of its ports unconnected:
.Rs
.IR x " => [0] ( [0]->[0]; [1]->Idle ) -> " "y" "; /* Error! */"
.br
.IR x " => ( [0]->[0]; [2]->Idle ) -> " "y" "; /* Error! */"
.Re
.LP
An element group does not define a new scope.  Its contents may refer
to elements declared outside of the group, and declarations inside the
group are visible after the group closes.  This differs from compound
elements, described next, which have a related syntax but
introduce a new scope.
'
.SH "COMPOUND ELEMENTS"
'
A
.I compound element
is a scoped collection of elements that behaves like a single element.
A compound element can be used anywhere an element class is
expected (that is, in a declaration or connection). Syntactically, a
compound element is a set of Click statements enclosed in braces `{ }'.
Inside the braces, the special names `input' and `output' represent
connections from or to the outside. Before a router is put on line,
compound elements are systematically expanded until none remain; thus, they
have no run-time overhead.
.PP
Here are some examples. This code, with a compound element,
.Rs
a -> { input -> X -> output } -> b;
.Re
expands to
.Rs
a -> X -> b;
.Re
Here is a more complicated example, with multiple ports:
.Rs
compound :: {
.br
\%  input -> X -> output;
.br
\%  input [1] -> Y -> [1] output;
.br
};
.br
a -> compound -> b;
.br
c -> [1] compound [1] -> d;
.Re
expands to
.Rs
a -> X -> b;
.br
c -> Y -> d;
.Re
.PP
The "input" and "output" pseudoelements incur no run-time overhead.
.PP
The actual expansions will differ from these examples because the elements
will have different names. A prefix is prepended to the components' names,
providing locality relative to other names in the configuration. The new
names have the form
.RI ` "compoundname" / "componentname" ',
where
.I compoundname
is the name of the compound element being expanded, and
.I componentname
is the name of the component element inside that compound. For example,
.Rs
compound :: { input -> x :: X -> output };
.br
a -> compound -> b;
.Re
is really expanded to
.Rs
a -> compound/x :: X -> b;
.Re
For this purpose, anonymous compound elements are given constructed names
like
.RI `@ number '.
Nothing prevents a user from declaring an element named like a compound
element component. We suggest that users generally avoid using the "/"
character in their element names.
.PP
It is an error to use an "input" pseudoelement's input ports or an
"output" pseudoelement's output ports. It is also an error to leave an
intermediate port unused\*Efor example, to use "input [0]" and "input [2]"
but not "input [1]".
'
.SS "The `elementclass' statement"
'
The `elementclass' statement lets the user name a frequently-occurring
compound element, and use the name as if it were a primitive element class.
Syntactically, it looks like this:
.Rs
elementclass
.I identifier
.I compoundelement
;
.Re
After this statement, every occurrence of the
.I identifier
will be replaced with the
.IR compoundelement .
For example, this code, with an `elementclass':
.Rs
elementclass MyQueue {
.br
\%  input -> Queue -> Shaper(1000) -> output;
.br
}
.br
q :: MyQueue;
.br
a -> q -> b;
.Re
is equivalent to this code, without it:
.Rs
q :: { input -> Queue -> Shaper(1000) -> output };
.br
a -> q -> b;
.Re
which roughly expands to:
.Rs
a -> Queue -> Shaper(1000) -> b;
.Re
.PP
The user can declare element classes that have the names of previously
existing element classes:
.Rs
elementclass Queue {
.br
\%  input -> Queue -> Shaper(1000) -> output;
.br
}
.Re
Element classes are nonrecursive and lexically scoped, so the `Queue'
inside this definition refers to the original `Queue'. The scope of an
element class definition extends from immediately after its closing right
brace to the end of the enclosing scope.
.PP
A variant of the elementclass statement makes synonyms for preexisting
element classes. For example, this statement
.Rs
elementclass MyQueue Queue;
.Re
makes MyQueue a synonym for Queue.
'
.SS "Configuration parameters"
'
Compound elements may take configuration parameters, which are expanded
into the configuration strings of its components. The parameters are named
at the beginning of the compound element. Each parameter looks like a Perl
variable\*Ea dollar sign followed by one or more letters, numbers, and
underscores. For example, this compound element
.Rs
{ $a, $b | ... }
.Re
takes two configuration parameters, named `$a' and `$b'. Keyword arguments
are also supported. For example, this compound element
.Rs
{ COUNT $count | ... }
.Re
takes a COUNT keyword parameter. Mismatched configuration parameters cause
errors; for example:
.Rs
\%{ $a, $b | ... } (1)         // Error: too few arguments
.br
\%{ $a, $b | ... } (1, 2, 3)   // Error: too many arguments
.br
\%{ COUNT $count | ... } (1)   // Error: missing 'COUNT' parameter
.Re
The special keyword `__REST__' matches any additional arguments supplied to
the compound element. For example:
.Rs
\%{ $a, COUNT $count, __REST__ $rest | ... }
.br
\%           (1, 2, COUNT 3, FOO 4)
.Re
This compound element will be expanded with `$a' set to `1', `$count' set
to `3', and `$rest' set to `2, FOO 4'.
.PP
In a compound element definition, all positional parameters must precede
any keyword parameters, and `__REST__', if present, must appear last of
all.
.PP
As the compound is expanded, its components' configuration strings are
searched for references to the parameters. Any such references are replaced
with the supplied arguments. For example, this code:
.Rs
\&... -> { $a | input ->
.br
\%           A(1, $a, 3) -> output } (100) -> ...
.Re
expands to this:
.Rs
\&... -> A(1, 100, 3) -> ...
.Re
You can avoid substitution by putting the dollar sign inside single quotes.
.PP
Use braces, like `${a}', to avoid including following letters in a variable
name. Click also supports the shell-like `${VAR-DEFAULT}' syntax, which
substitutes the value of `$VAR', or `DEFAULT' if that variable was not set.
See also PARAMETER DEFINITIONS, below.
'
.SS "Overloading"
'
A single compound element may contain multiple overloaded definitions
separated from one another by two vertical bars "\f(CW||\fR". Different
definitions may have different numbers of input ports, different numbers of
output ports, or different sets of configuration arguments. For example,
this extended MyQueue compound element takes an optional capacity argument,
just like Queue itself:
.Rs
elementclass MyQueue {
.br
\%  input -> Queue -> Shaper(1000) -> output;
.br
\%||
.br
\%  $cap | input -> Queue($cap)
.br
\%               -> Shaper(1000) -> output;
.br
}
.Re
For each use of an overloaded compound element, Click will choose the first
definition that matches the provided number of input ports, number of
output ports, and configuration arguments. It is an error if no definition
matches these properties exactly.
.PP
It is also possible to extend an existing element class with new overloaded
definitions with "\f(CW...\fR". For example, this definition introduces a
two-argument version of Queue:
.Rs
elementclass Queue {
.br
\%  $cap, $rate | input -> Queue($cap)
.br
\%                -> Shaper($rate) -> output;
.br
\%|| ...
.br
}
.Re
(The ellipsis in this example must be typed verbatim.) The overloadings
visible at a given declaration are those that lexically precede that
declaration. For example, the following example is an error since the
two-argument version of Test is not visible at the declaration where it is
required:
.Rs
elementclass Test { $a | /* nothing */ }
.br
test :: Test(1, 2);
.br
elementclass Test { $a, $b | /* nothing */ || ... }
.Re
'
.SH "CONFIGURATION STRINGS"
'
Click configuration strings are comma-separated lists of arguments, where
each argument is a space-separated list of objects. This section describes
some common object types. See the element documentation for argument types
expected by a particular element.
.PP
Configuration strings may contain comments (`// ... EOL' and `/* ... */'),
which are replaced with single space characters. Inside single- or
double-quoted strings, commas, spaces, and comment-starting sequences lose
their regular meaning and are treated as normal characters.
.PP
The most common object types are:
.TP 3
\(bu
.B Strings.
Any sequence of characters.  Single- or double-quoted strings are allowed
(and required, if the string contains a space or comma).  Inside
double-quoted strings, backslash substitutions are performed; see below.
You can concatenate strings by juxtaposing them.  For example, `a"b"c' is
equivalent to `abc'.
.TP
\(bu
.B Booleans.
`0', `false', and `no' mean false; `1', `true', and `yes' mean true.
.TP
\(bu
.B Integers
preceded by an optional `+' or `\-' sign. Decimal, octal (first digit `0'),
and hexadecimal (starting with `0x') are allowed.
.TP
\(bu
.B Real numbers
in decimal notation.
.TP
\(bu
.B Times and delays
in decimal real notation, followed by an optional unit: `s'/`sec', `ms',
`us', `ns', `m'/`min', `h'/`hr'.
.TP
\(bu
.B Bandwidths
in decimal real notation, followed by an optional unit: `bps' or `Bps' for
bits or bytes per second, with an optional SI prefix `k', `M', or `G'.  The
default unit is generally `Bps'.
.TP
\(bu
.B IP addresses
in the conventional `n.n.n.n' form (for example, `18.26.4.15').
.TP
\(bu
.B IP network prefixes
in the CIDR form `n.n.n.n/k' (for example, `18.26.4/24').
.TP
\(bu
.B IPv6 addresses
in any of the conventional forms (for example, `::',
`1080::8:800:200C:417A', or `::18.26.4.15').
.TP
\(bu
.B Ethernet addresses
in the standard `x-x-x-x-x-x' form (for example,
`0-a0-c9-9c-fd-9c'), or the more conventional `x:x:x:x:x:x' form.
.TP
\(bu
.B Element names.
.PD
.PP
Some elements, like
.IR Classifier ,
take arguments that don't fit any of these types. See the element
documentation for details.
.PP
If the last argument in a configuration string is empty (containing only
whitespace and comments), then it is ignored.  Thus, `Element(1, )',
`Element(1, /* comment */)', and `Element(1)' behave exactly alike.
.PP
Configuration strings may also contain parameter references, such as
`$interface'. The parameter values are substituted in. Parameters may be
defined either by compound element arguments, by explicit `define'
statements, or on the command line.
'
.SS "Backslash Substitutions"
.PP
The following backslash substitutions are performed inside double quotes.
Additionally, as a special case, a bare data substitution sequence `\e<
\&... >' acts as if it were enclosed in double quotes.  (Inside single
quotes, `\e< ... >' is not special.)
.TP 4
1.
'
C-like substitutions. Specifically, `\ea', `\eb', `\et', `\en', `\ev',
`\ef', `\er', `\e\e', and `\e[1, 2, or 3 octal digits]' have their C
meanings.  `\ex[any number of hex digits]' is replaced with the byte
defined by the last 2 hex digits.
.TP 4
2.
Data substitutions. An escape sequence `\e< ... hex digits and spaces ...
>' is replaced with the data represented by the hex digits. For example,
the sequence `\e< 48 45 4c 4C 4f >' is replaced with `HELLO'.
.TP
3.
Backlash-newline sequences (`\e[LF]', `\e[CR]', or `\e[CR][LF]') are removed.
.TP
4.
Any other `\e[CHAR]' sequence is replaced with `[CHAR]'.
'
.SH "REQUIREMENTS"
'
The `require' statement is used to link a configuration with optional
packages and libraries. Its argument is a comma-separated list of
requirements.
.PP
Packages, which are dynamic objects including new compiled element
definitions, are included with `require(package)' declarations:
.Rs
require(package fastclassifier, package specialcode);
.Re
Installation programs can use the package names to find and upload any
necessary package code. The required package names are also checked against
a list of currently active packages when a configuration is installed. If
any required packages are unavailable, an error is reported.
.PP
Libraries, which are Click configuration files that (for instance) might
declare new compound element definitions, are included with
`require(library)' declarations:
.Rs
require(library mycompounds.click);
.Re
Installation programs search CLICKPATH for the named library
file. `require(library)' can only be used at file scope, and a given
library file is included at most once, no matter how many times it is
mentioned in `require' statements.
'
.SH "PARAMETER DEFINITIONS"
'
Parameters are defined using the `define' statement. Its argument is a
comma-separated list of pairs, each pair consisting of a configuration
variable and a value:
.Rs
define($DEVNAME eth0, $COUNT 1);
.Re
This sets the `$DEVNAME' parameter to `eth0' and the `$COUNT' parameter to
`1'. Definitions are lexically scoped, so definitions inside a compound
element are not visible outside it. However, all definitions in a given
scope take place simultaneously, regardless of their ordering. The
following two configurations have the same effect:
.Rs
1) define($a 2); Message($a)
.br
2) Message($a); define($a 2)
.Re
It is an error to define a parameter more than once in any single
scope. Click programs such as
.M click 1
and
.M click-install 1
allow parameters to specified on the command line; these override any
global parameters with the same names.
'
.SH "LEXICAL ISSUES"
'
Click identifiers are nonempty sequences of letters, numbers, underscores
`_', at-signs `@', and slashes `/' that do not begin or end with a slash.
The system uses `@' and `/' for special purposes: `@' in constructed names
for anonymous elements and prefixes, and `/' in names for components of
compound elements. Users are discouraged from using these characters in
their own identifiers. Identifiers are case-sensitive. No component of an
identifier may consist solely of numbers; for example, `1/x' is an illegal
identifier.
.PP
The keywords `elementclass', `require', `provide', and `define'
may not be used as identifiers. The normal identifiers `input' and `output'
have special meaning inside compound element definitions.
.PP
The following characters and multi-character sequences are single Click
tokens:
.RS
->\~\~=>\~\~::\~\~;\~\~,\~\~(\~\~)\~\~[\~\~]\~\~{\~\~}\~\~|\~\~||\~\~...
.RE
.PP
Whitespace (using the C definition) and comments separate Click tokens.
Click uses C++-style comments: from `//' to the end of the line, or from
`/*' to the next `*/'. Either form of comment terminates an identifier, so
this Click fragment
.RS
an/identifier/with/slashes//too/many
.RE
has an identifier `an/identifier/with/slashes' and a comment
`//too/many'. No identifier contains two consecutive slashes.
.PP
Parameters, which are used in compound elements, look like Perl variables. A
parameter consists of a dollar sign `$' followed by one or more letters,
numbers, and underscores.
.PP
A configuration string starts immediately following a left parenthesis `(',
and continues up to the next unbalanced right parenthesis `)'. However,
parentheses inside single or double quotes or comments do not affect
balancing. Here are several examples; in each case, the configuration
string consists of the text between the `#' marks (including the `#' marks
themselves).
.Rs
C1(#simple string#)
.br
C2(#string with (balanced parens)#)
.br
C3(#string with ")quoted" paren#)
.br
C4(#// end-of-line comment)
.br
\%   still going!#)
.br
C5(#/* slash-star comment) */ and backslash \e#)
.Re
.PP
A Click program may contain C preprocessor-style line directives. These
lines start with `#' and have the form `# \fIlinenumber\fP
"\fIfilename\fP"' or `#line \fIlinenumber\fP "\fIfilename\fP"'; they change
the filenames and line numbers used for error messages. The filename
portion is optional. Line directives are not recognized inside
configuration strings.
'
.SH "ARCHIVES"
Many Click programs also accept
.M ar 1
archives as configurations. The archive must contain a member called
`config', which is treated as a Click-language configuration. The archive
may also contain package code required by the configuration. The
.M click-install 1
and
.M click 1
programs will decompose the archive and install any package code before
installing the configuration itself. The
.M click.o 8
kernel module will not accept archives; use
.M click-install 1 .
'
.SH "BNF GRAMMAR"
'
.IR stmts " ::= " stmts " " stmt " | " empty
.br
.IR stmt " ::= " connection
.br
.RI "    | " elementclassstmt " | " requirestmt
.br
.RI "    | " definestmt " | "";"""
.br
.IR connection " ::= " elements " " opt-conntail " | " conntail
.br
.IR opt-conntail " ::= " conntail " | " empty
.br
.IR conntail " ::= " arrow " " elements " " opt-conntail " | " arrow
.br
.IR arrow " ::= ""->"" | ""=>"""
.br
.IR elements " ::= " element " | " elements " "","" " element
.br
.IR element " ::= " opt-port " " element-reference " " opt-port
.br
.IR element-reference " ::= " element-name
.br
.RI "    | " element-name " ""::"" " class " " opt-config
.br
.RI "    | " class " " opt-config
.br
.RI "    | " group
.br
.IR element-name " ::= identifier"
.br
.IR opt-port " ::= ""["" " ports " ""]"" | " empty
.br
.IR ports " ::= portnumber | " ports " "","" portnumber"
.br
.IR opt-config " ::= ""("" configstring "")"" | " empty
.br
.IR class " ::= identifier | ""{"" " compounds " ""}"""
.br
.RI "    | ""{"" " compounds " ""||"" ""..."" ""}"""
.br
.IR compounds " ::= " compound " | " compounds " ""||"" " compound
.br
.IR compound " ::= " stmts " | " opt-formals " ""|"" " stmts
.br
.IR opt-formals " ::= " formals " | " empty
.br
.IR formals " ::= " formal " | " formals " "","" " formal
.br
.IR formal " ::= parameter | identifier parameter"
.br
.IR group " ::= ""("" " stmts " "")"""
.br
.IR elementclassstmt " ::= ""elementclass"" identifier " class
.br
.IR requirestmt " ::= ""require"" ""("" configstring "")"""
.br
.IR definestmt " ::= ""define"" ""("" configstring "")"""
.br
.IR empty " ::= "
'
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.M click 1 ,
.M click-install 1 ,
.M click.o 8
'
.SH AUTHOR
.na
Eddie Kohler, kohler@seas.harvard.edu
.br
http://www.pdos.lcs.mit.edu/click/
'
