.\" -*- mode: nroff -*-
.ds V 1.0.3
.ds E " \-\- 
.if t .ds E \(em
.de Sp
.if n .sp
.if t .sp 0.4
..
.de Es
.Sp
.RS 5
.nf
..
.de Ee
.fi
.RE
.PP
..
.de Rs
.RS
.Sp
..
.de Re
.Sp
.RE
..
.de M
.BR "\\$1" "(\\$2)\\$3"
..
.de RM
.RB "\\$1" "\\$2" "(\\$3)\\$4"
..
.TH CLICK-DEVIRTUALIZE 1 "31/Mar/2000" "Version \*V"
.SH NAME
click-devirtualize \- removes virtual function calls from a Click router configuration
'
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B click-devirtualize
.I \%[options]
.I \%[router\-file]
'
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B click-devirtualize
tool speeds up a Click configuration by removing virtual function calls
from its elements. It reads a router configuration file in the
.M click 5
language and creates specialized C++ source code for each element. The
virtual function calls in this specialized C++ code are replaced with
direct function calls to other elements in the configuration.
.PP
After creating the source code,
.B click-devirtualize
will optionally compile it into dynamically loadable packages. The elements
in the input configuration are changed to use new, specially generated
element classes, and the resulting configuration, plus source code and any
compiled packages, are combined into an archive and written to the standard
output. You can install such an archive into the
.M click.o 8
Linux kernel module with
.M click-install 1 :
.Sp
.nf
  % click-devirtualize -k CONFIGURATION | click-install
.fi
.Sp
The
.M click 1
user level driver can read the archives directly.
.PP
The
.B click-devirtualize
transformation can be reversed with the
.B \-\-reverse
option.
'
.SH "OPTIONS"
'
If any filename argument is a single dash "-",
.B click-devirtualize
will use the standard input or output instead, as appropriate.
'
.TP 5
.BI \-f " file"
.PD 0
.TP
.BI \-\-file " file"
Read the router configuration to transform from
.IR file .
The default is the standard input.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BI \-o " file"
.TP
.BI \-\-output " file"
Write the output router configuration to
.IR file .
The default is the standard output.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-kernel
Generate a dynamically loadable package for the
.M click.o 8
Linux kernel module.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-user
Generate a dynamically loadable package for the
.M click 1
user-level driver.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BR \-s ", " \-\-source
Output only the specialized element class source code.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config
Output only the new configuration (the one that includes specialized
elements).
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BR \-r ", " \-\-reverse
Reverse the tranformation. That is, change any existing devirtualized 
element classes into the equivalent normal elements.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BI \-n " class"
.TP
.BI \-\-no\-devirtualize " class"
Do not devirtualize elements whose element class is
.IR class .
Such elements will continue using normal source code.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BI \-l " elem1 elem2"
.TP
.BI \-\-like " elem1 elem2"
The elements
.IR elem1 " and " elem2
will share devirtualized source code. This is only valid if
.IR elem1 " and " elem2
are
.IR compatible .
Two elements are compatible iff they have the same number of inputs, the
same number of outputs, the same port processing (push or pull), the
elements connected to corresponding push outputs are compatible
recursively, and the elements connected to corresponding pull inputs are
compatible recursively.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BI \-i " file"
.TP
.BI \-\-instructions " file"
Read devirtualization instructions from
.IR file .
This file can contain any number of lines. Comments start with `#';
non-blank, non-comment lines should have devirtualization directives. There
are two kinds of directives: "noclass
.IR "class1 class2..." ""","
which is equivalent to several `\-\-no\-devirtualize
.IR class "i'"
options, and "like
.IR "class1 class2..." ""","
which is equivalent to several `\-\-like
.IR "class1 class2" '
options.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BI \-\-help
Print usage information and exit.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BI \-\-version
Print the version number and some quickie warranty information and exit.
'
.PD
'
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.M click 1 ,
.M click-install 1 ,
.M click 5 ,
.M click.o 8
'
.SH AUTHOR
.na
Eddie Kohler, eddietwo@lcs.mit.edu
.br
http://www.pdos.lcs.mit.edu/click/
'
