.\" -*- mode: nroff -*-
.ds V 1.5.0
.ds E " \-\- 
.if t .ds E \(em
.de Sp
.if n .sp
.if t .sp 0.4
..
.de Es
.Sp
.RS 5
.nf
..
.de Ee
.fi
.RE
.PP
..
.de Rs
.RS
.Sp
..
.de Re
.Sp
.RE
..
.de M
.BR "\\$1" "(\\$2)\\$3"
..
.de RM
.RB "\\$1" "\\$2" "(\\$3)\\$4"
..
.TH CLICK-FLATTEN 1 "21/May/2001" "Version \*V"
.SH NAME
click-flatten \- removes compound elements from a Click configuration
'
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B click-flatten
.RI \%[ options ]
.RI \%[ param = value " ...]"
.RI \%[ router\-file ]
'
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B click-flatten
tool flattens a Click router configuration, compiling all its compound
elements away, and writes the resulting configuration to the standard
output. It can also output information about the file.
'
.SH "OPTIONS"
'
If any filename argument is a single dash "-",
.B click-flatten
will use the standard input or output instead, as appropriate.
'
.TP 5
.BR \-c ", " \-\-classes
.PD 0
Output an alphabetical list of the element classes used by the flattened
router file, one per line, instead of the usual configuration.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BR \-n ", " \-\-elements
Output an alphabetical list of the element names in the flattened router
file, one per line, instead of the usual configuration.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BR \-d ", " \-\-declaration
Output the element declarations in the flattened router file, one per line,
instead of the usual configuration.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BR \-f ", " \-\-file " \fIfile"
Read the router configuration to flatten from
.IR file .
The default is the standard input.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BR \-e ", " \-\-expression " \fIexpr"
Use
.IR expr ,
a string in the Click language, as the router configuration to flatten.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-\-config
Output flattened configuration only -- if the input was an archive, ignore
other archive elements.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-\-expand\-vars
Expand global variables.  By default,
.B click-flatten
does not expand global variables into configuration strings, allowing later
operations, such as
.BR click-install ,
to override their values.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " \fIfile"
Write the flattened router configuration to
.IR file .
The default is the standard output.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BI \-\-help
Print usage information and exit.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BI \-\-version
Print the version number and some quickie warranty information and exit.
'
.PD
'
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.M click 5 ,
.M click-check 1 ,
.M click-xform 1
'
.SH AUTHOR
.na
Eddie Kohler, kohler@seas.harvard.edu
.br
http://www.pdos.lcs.mit.edu/click/
'
