.\" -*- mode: nroff -*-
.ds V 1.1
.ds E " \-\- 
.if t .ds E \(em
.de Sp
.if n .sp
.if t .sp 0.4
..
.de Es
.Sp
.RS 5
.nf
..
.de Ee
.fi
.RE
.PP
..
.de Rs
.RS
.Sp
..
.de Re
.Sp
.RE
..
.de M
.BR "\\$1" "(\\$2)\\$3"
..
.de RM
.RB "\\$1" "\\$2" "(\\$3)\\$4"
..
.TH CLICK-UNDEAD 1 "28/Aug/2000" "Version \*V"
.SH NAME
click-undead \- removes dead code from a Click configuration
'
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B click-undead
.RI \%[ param = value " ...]"
.RI \%[ options ]
.RI \%[ router\-file ]
'
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B click-undead
tool speeds up some Click configurations by removing dead code. This
includes:
.IP "\(bu" 3
Any
.M Null n ,
.M StaticSwitch n ,
and
.M StaticPullSwitch n
elements.
.IP "\(bu" 3
Any elements not reachable from both a 
.I source element
and a
.IR "sink element" .
Click packet source elements include
.M FromDevice n
and
.M InfiniteSource n ;
packet sink elements include
.M ToDump n ,
.M ToDevice n ,
and
.M Discard n
(when it is used as a pull element).
.IP "\(bu" 3
Dead ports on scheduler elements 
.RM ( RoundRobinSched n ,
.M PrioSched n ,
.M StrideSched n ,
and so on) are removed. These are ports that no packet could ever enter.
.IP "\(bu" 3
Scheduler elements that have only one attached input are redundant, so they
are removed.
.IP "\(bu" 3
Dead ports on tee elements
.RM ( Tee n ,
.M PullTee n )
are removed. These are ports with no packet sink downstream.
.IP "\(bu" 3
Tee elements that have only one attached output are redundant, so they are
removed.
.PP
.B click-undead
will not remove any information elements. Connections to removed elements
are rerouted appropriately.
.PP
For example,
.B click-undead 
will transform this configuration,
.Sp
.nf
   Idle -> Counter -> td1 :: ToDump(a);
   InfiniteSource -> ss :: StaticSwitch(1);
     ss[0] -> ToDump(c);
     ss[1] -> Queue -> rr :: RoundRobinSched;
     Idle -> [1]rr;
     rr -> td2 :: ToDump(b);
.fi
.Sp
into this configuration:
.Sp
.nf
   InfiniteSource -> Queue -> td2 :: ToDump(b);
.fi
.Sp
Note that the resulting configuration is not guaranteed to have the same
semantics as the input configuration. Here, for example, the result
configuration does not truncate the files `a' and `c'.
.PP
The resulting configuration is written to the standard output. 
'
.SH "OPTIONS"
'
If any filename argument is a single dash "-",
.B click-undead
will use the standard input or output instead, as appropriate.
'
.TP 5
.BI \-f " file"
.PD 0
.TP
.BI \-\-file " file"
Read the router configuration to transform from
.IR file .
The default is the standard input.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BI \-e " expr"
.TP
.BI \-\-expression " expr"
Use
.IR expr ,
a string in the Click language, as the router configuration to transform.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BI \-o " file"
.TP
.BI \-\-output " file"
Write the output router configuration to
.IR file .
The default is the standard output.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-kernel
Check the configuration only for the
.M click.o 8
Linux kernel module driver.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-user
Check the configuration only for the
.M click 1
user-level driver.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config
Output only the new configuration, not any archived packages.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BR \-V ", " \-\-verbose
Print debugging information about the transformation\*Efor example, which
elements are chosen as sources and sinks.
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BI \-\-help
Print usage information and exit.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BI \-\-version
Print the version number and some quickie warranty information and exit.
'
.PD
'
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.M click 1 ,
.M click-install 1 ,
.M click 5 ,
.M click.o 8 ,
.M Discard n ,
.M FromDevice n ,
.M InfiniteSource n ,
.M ToDump n ,
.M ToDevice n
'
.SH AUTHOR
.na
Eddie Kohler, kohler@seas.harvard.edu
.br
http://www.pdos.lcs.mit.edu/click/
'
