.\" -*- mode: nroff -*-
.ds V 1.0.5
.ds E " \-\- 
.if t .ds E \(em
.de Sp
.if n .sp
.if t .sp 0.4
..
.de Es
.Sp
.RS 5
.nf
..
.de Ee
.fi
.RE
.PP
..
.de Rs
.RS
.Sp
..
.de Re
.Sp
.RE
..
.de M
.BR "\\$1" "(\\$2)\\$3"
..
.de RM
.RB "\\$1" "\\$2" "(\\$3)\\$4"
..
.TH CLICK-COMBINE 1 "27/Apr/2000" "Version \*V"
.SH NAME
click-combine \- combines two or more Click configurations into one
'
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B click-combine
.RI \%[ options ]
\%\fIname\fR=\fIfile\fR ... \e
.br
\%        \fIname1\fR.\fIelement1\fR=\fIname2\fR.\fIelement2\fR ...
'
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B click-combine
tool combines two or more Click router configurations into a single
virtual configuration representing the network. Special RouterLink elements
represent links between routers. For example, say there is a
point-to-point link from router A's eth0 interface to router B's eth1
interface. Then in the combined configuration, A's ToDevice(eth0) element
and B's PollDevice(eth1) element will be replaced with a new RouterLink
element; packets will flow from A to B via the RouterLink element.
.LP
Click drivers can't execute the resulting virtual configuration since the
RouterLink "element class" has no definition. If you want to execute a
combined configuration, edit the configuration to replace the RouterLinks
with real elements representing the relevant link properties. For example,
this definition gives point-to-point links 10\~microsecond latency and
1\~MBps bandwidth:
.LP
.nf
   elementclass RouterLink { $srcclass, $srcargs, $dstclass, $dstargs |
       input -> LinkUnqueue(10us, 1MBps) -> output
   }
.fi
.LP
You can
edit the combined configuration with tools, which are effectively able to
consider the whole network. For example, they can check cross-router
properties or perform cross-router optimizations. Use the
.M click-uncombine 1
tool to extract a component router configuration from the combination.
.PP
Component routers are identified by name. This name must be a legal Click
identifier (see
.M click 5 )
that does not contain a slash. To add a router component named
.I N
whose configuration is in the file
.IR f ,
supply the option
.RI ` N = f '.
You will generally supply at least two such options.
.PP
A link says that packets leaving one router via one element will arrive at
another router via another element. The routers are specified by component
name, and the elements can be specified by element name or by device name.
To connect the
.I e1
element from  router component
.I A
to the
.I e2
element from router component
.IR B ,
supply the option
.RI ` A . e1 = B . e2 '.
If
.I e1
is a
.M ToDevice n
element, then you can use its device name argument instead of its name.
Similarly, if
.I e2
is a
.M PollDevice n
or
.M FromDevice n
element, you can use its device name argument instead of its name.
.PP
Link options are one-way, so if there is a duplex connection, you will need
to give two arguments: `A.eth0=B.eth1 B.eth1=A.eth0', for example. You can
also support more than two routers sharing a link; for example,
`A.eth0=B.eth1 A.eth0=C.eth2'.
'
.SH "OPTIONS"
'
If any filename argument is a single dash "-",
.B click-combine
will use the standard input or output instead, as appropriate.
'
.TP 5
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " \fIfile"
.PD 0
Write the output router configuration to
.IR file .
The default is the standard output.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-name " \fIname"
The next router component will be named
.IR name .
This option and the
.BR \-\-file
provide an alternative to the
.IR name = file
syntax.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-file " \fIfile"
Read a router configuration from
.IR file .
Together with the
.BR \-\-name
option, the
.B \-\-file
and
.B \-\-expression
options provide an alternative to the
.IR name = file
syntax.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-expression " \fIexpr"
Use
.IR expr ,
a string in the Click language, as the next router configuration.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-link " \fIcomponent1\fR.\fIelement1\fR=\fIcomponent2\fR.\fIelement2"
Add a link specification as described above.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config
Output new configuration only (not an archive with extra information).
'
.Sp
.TP 5
.BI \-\-help
Print usage information and exit.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BI \-\-version
Print the version number and some quickie warranty information and exit.
'
.PD
'
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.M click-uncombine 1 ,
.M click-xform 1 ,
.M click 5 ,
.M PollDevice n ,
.M FromDevice n ,
.M ToDevice n
'
.SH AUTHOR
.na
Eddie Kohler, kohler@seas.harvard.edu
.br
http://www.pdos.lcs.mit.edu/click/
'
