.\" -*- mode: nroff -*-
.ds E " \-\- 
.if t .ds E \(em
.de Sp
.if n .sp
.if t .sp 0.4
..
.de Es
.Sp
.RS 5
.nf
..
.de Ee
.fi
.RE
.PP
..
.de Rs
.RS
.Sp
..
.de Re
.Sp
.RE
..
.de M
.BR "\\$1" "(\\$2)\\$3"
..
.de RM
.RB "\\$1" "\\$2" "(\\$3)\\$4"
..
.TH CONNECTION 3 "19/Oct/1999" "Version \*V"
.SH NAME
Element::Connection \- Click class for connections to elements
'
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Connection class, which is a nested class of Element (see
.M Element 3 ),
represents the element\-port pair connected to a particular port. Each
input and output port corresponds to a Connection object, but only some of
those objects are meaningful\*Eparticularly, push output ports and pull
input ports.
.PP
The interesting methods of Connection are:
.PP
'
.PD 0
.TP 5
.BR "operator bool() const"
Returns
.B true
iff the Connection is a pull input or a push output. The system ensures
that every such connection has a unique endpoint. Pull outputs and push
inputs can be connected an arbitrary number of times, or possibly not at
all.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR "void push(" "Packet *\fIp" ") const"
Pushes the packet \fIp\fR to the Connection's other endpoint. Requires that
the Connection is a push output. Roughly equivalent to 
.nf
\%     element()->push(p, port());
.fi
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR "Packet *pull() const"
Pulls a packet from the Connection's other endpoint and returns it.
Requires that the Connection is a pull input. Roughly equivalent to
.nf
\%     return element()->pull(port());
.fi
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR "Element *element() const"
Returns the element on the other endpoint of the Connection. Returns 0 on
pull outputs and push inputs.
'
.Sp
.TP
.BR "int port() const"
Returns the port number of the other endpoint of the Connection. Returns -1
on pull outputs and push inputs.
.PD
'
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.M Element 3 ,
.M click 5 ,
.M elements n
'
.SH AUTHOR
.na
Eddie Kohler, eddietwo@lcs.mit.edu
.br
http://www.pdos.lcs.mit.edu/click/
'
